The Shahnameh is an epic that encompasses the history of ancient Persian kings from the beginning of time
all the way to the advent of Islam. Meant to celebrate the ideals of Persian kingship, there are a
multitude of stories within the text that accomplish this goal. The story which relates to our image here
is not so much a celebration of kingship but it is rather a lesson on  the importance of humility and faith through the
example of a king blinded by his own ambition. In our illustration , we are dealing with the story of how the
Shah Kay Kavus becomes tricked into flying to the heavens. One day, the Shah is tempted by the
words of a div, disguised as a beautiful youth, to expand his kingdom from the Earth to the heavens. Kay Kavus
is moved so much by the flattery of the beautiful youth that he decides to build a flying device that will take him to the sky.
The flying device, a true example of the Shah’s flawed ingenuity, was made by attaching eagles, fed to be as strong
as lions, to each corner of a throne. The Shah then had spears bound to each corner of the throne as
well, with lamb legs skewered onto these spear heads. As such, through the power of the strong eagles flying
towards these pieces of meat, the King was lifted with his throne from the ground and towards the sky.
Within the painting, the placement of the Shah and his flying device in the centre immediately draws the observer’s attention.
The device could be thought of as an extension to the King’s character. It is ornate in detail and its engineering is flawed,
similar to the King’s regal but flawed character. He has taken a seemingly impossible task to expand his kingdom to the heavens
using a flying device that will ultimately fail him. In the time that his device does work, the Shah is able to reach his destination only temporarily.
Displayed in a moment of action, we see Kay Kavus aiming his bow and arrow at a fish held by an angel.
The divine location of this scene is indicated by the background of the blue sky and golden clouds encircling the Shah and the angel.
The use of these rich colours makes this moment of action feel alive and vivid.
In addition, it asserts a religious context to the scene. The blue and gold colour of the background is
analogous to examples of the gold-written text of the Quran on blue backgrounds.
Applying this analogy to the illustration, it reinforces the religious context to the scene and related story.
Blinded by his own ambition, it could be argued that the Shah had forgotten his faith,
not seeing the folly in his attempt to conquer the heavens, the domain of the very God he worships.
Eventually his eagles grow tired of flying his throne and he descends upon a forest far away.
In the translated text we see that Kay Kavus grows remorseful of his actions.
The Shah “tarried in the wood in shame and grief, imploring from Almighty God relief.”
The lesson of the story is thus delivered as Kay Kavus returns to his senses and remembers the importance of his faith, feeling humility for his actions.
feeling humility for his actions.